in this video I'd like to talk about one
last detail of k-means clustering which
is how to choose the number of clusters
or how to choose the value of the
parameter capital k to be honest there
actually isn't a great way of answering
this or of doing this automatically and
by far the most common way of choosing
the number of clusters is still choosing
it manually by the visualizations or by
looking at the output of the clustering
algorithm or something else but I do get
asked this question quite a lot of how
do you choose the number of clusters and
so just want to tell you you know what
is what are people's current thinking on
it although the most common thing is
actually to choose the number of
clusters by hand a large part of why it
might not always be easy to choose the
number of clusters is that is often
genuinely ambiguous how many clusters
there are in the data looking at this
data set some of you may see 4 clusters
and that would suggest using K equals 4
or some of you may see 2 clusters and
that will suggest K equals 2 and yet
others may see 3 clusters and so looking
at the data set like that is the the
true number of clusters it actually
seems genuinely ambiguous to me and I
don't think there is right one right
answer and this is part of unsupervised
learning we aren't given labels and so
there isn't always a clear-cut answer
and this is one of the things that makes
it more difficult to say have an
automatic algorithm for choosing how
many clusters to have when people talk
about ways of choosing the number of
clusters one method that people
sometimes talk about is something called
the elbow method let me just tell you a
little bit about that and then mention
some of these advantages but also
shortcomings so the elbow method what
we're going to do is vary K which is the
total number of clusters so we're going
to run k-means with one cluster that
means really everything gets grouped
into a single cluster and compute the
cost function compute the distortion J
and that here
and then we're going to run k-means with
two clusters
maybe with multiple random
initializations maybe not but then you
know with two classes we should get
hopefully a smaller distortion and so
plot that there and then run k-means
with three clusters hopefully you can
leave a smaller for the distortion and
plot that there and run k-means four
four five and so on so we end up with a
curve showing how the distortion you
know goes down as we increase the number
of clusters and so we get a curve that
maybe looks like this and if you look at
this curve what the elbow method does is
says well let's look at this plot looks
like there's a clear elbow there right
this is a movie by analogy to the human
arm where you know if you imagine that
you reach out your arm then this is your
shoulder joint this is your elbow joint
and against your hand is at the end of
here and so this is the elbow method
then you find this sort of pattern where
the distortion goes down rapidly from
one to two and two to three and then you
reach an elbow at three and then the
distortion goes down very slowly after
that then it looks like you know what
maybe using three clusters is the right
number of clusters because that's the
elbow of this curve right that goes down
distortion goes on rapidly until tables
three then it goes now very slowly after
that so let's pick K equals three
if you apply the elbow method and if you
get a plot that actually looks like this
then that's pretty good and this would
be a reasonable way of choosing the
number of clusters it turns out the
elbow method isn't used that often and
one reason is that if you actually use
this one with clustering problem turns
out that fairly often you know you end
up of a curve that looks much more
ambiguous so maybe something like this
and if you look at this I don't know
maybe there's no clear elf over it looks
like Distortion continuously goes down
maybe three is a good number
maybe force a good number maybe five is
also not bad and so if you actually do
this in practice you know if your plot
looks like the one on the left and
that's great gives you a clear answer
but just as often you end up with a plot
that looks like the one on the right and
it's not clear what the where the
location of the elbow is it makes it
harder to choose a number of clusters
using this method
so maybe the quick summary of the elbow
method is that it's worth a shot
that I wouldn't necessarily you know
have a very high expectation that
they're working for any particular
problem
finally here's one other way of how
thinking about how you choose the value
of K very often people are running
k-means in order to get clusters for
some later purpose or for some sort of
downstream purpose maybe you want to use
k-means in order to do market
segmentation like in the t-shirt sizing
example that we talked about maybe you
want came in to organize a computer
cluster better or maybe a learning
cluster for some different purpose and
so if that later downstream purpose such
as market segmentation if that gives you
an evaluation metric then often a better
way to determine the number of classes
is to see how well different numbers of
clusters serve that later downstream
purpose let me step through a specific
example let me go through the t-shirt
sizing example again and I'm trying to
decide do I want three t-shirt sizes so
I choose K equals three then I might
have small medium and large t-shirts or
maybe I want to choose K equals five and
then I might have your extra small small
medium large and extra-large t-shirt
sizes so kind of like three t-shirt
sizes or four or five t-shirt sizes we
can also have four teacher sizes but I'm
just showing three and five you know
just to simplify this slide for now so
ever run k-means with k equals three
maybe I end up with that's my small and
that's my medium and that's my large
whereas I run k-means with five clusters
maybe I end up with those are my extra
small teachers these are my small these
online medium these are my large and
these are my extra-large and the nice
thing about this example is that this
then maybe gives us another way to
choose whether we want three or four or
five clusters and in particular what you
can do is you know think about this from
the perspective of the t-shirt business
and ask well if I have five segments
then how well can I how well my t-shirts
fit my customers and so how many
t-shirts going to sell how happy with my
customers be you know what really makes
sense from from the prospective t-shirt
business in terms of whether I want to
have more t-shirt sizes so that my
t-shirts
fits my customers better or do I want to
have fewer t-shirt sizes so that on I
make fewer sizes of t-shirts and I can
sell them to the customers more cheaply
and so as a t-shirt selling business
that might give you a way to decide
between three clusters versus five
clusters so that gives you an example of
how a later downstream purpose like the
problem of deciding what t-shirts the
manufacturer how that can give you an
evaluation metric for choosing the
number of clusters for those of you that
are doing the programming exercises if
you look at this week's program exercise
associative k-means that's an example
there of using k-means for image
compression and so if you were trying to
choose how many clusters to use for that
problem
you could also again use the evaluation
think of image compression to choose the
number of clusters k so how good do you
want to image the look versus how much
do you want to compress the file size of
the images and you know if you do the
programs of size whether just said will
make more sense at that time so just
summarize there for the most part the
number of clusters K is still chosen by
hand by human inputs or human in science
one way to try to do so is to use the
elbow method but I wouldn't always
expect that to work well but I think the
better way to think about how to choose
the number of clusters is also for what
purpose are you running k-means and then
to think what is the number of clusters
k that serves that whatever later
purpose that you're actually running
k-means for